---
layout: post
title: Ram
date: 2019-06-20 00:00:00 -0000

image: https://i.imgur.com/9LDqsJq.png
tags: [Articles]
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->



---

<hr>
<p>layout: post<br>
title: Ram<br>
date: 2019-06-20 00:00:00 -0000</p>
<p>tags: [Articles]<br>
excerpt_separator: <!--more--></p>
<hr>
<p><a href="https://unacademy.com/lesson/indian-polity-course-overview-in-hindi/M1BV1AGE">https://unacademy.com/lesson/indian-polity-course-overview-in-hindi/M1BV1AGE</a><br>
<a href="https://unacademy.com/course/polity/MH7H53E7">https://unacademy.com/course/polity/MH7H53E7</a></p>
<p><a href="https://unacademy.com/goal/ssc-exams/static-gk/indian-polity-and-constitution/QLRUQ">https://unacademy.com/goal/ssc-exams/static-gk/indian-polity-and-constitution/QLRUQ</a><br>
<strong>Lecture 1: Parts of Indian Constiution</strong></p>
<p>One of the lengthiest constitution of the world.</p>
<p>465 Article, 25 parts, 12 Schedules</p>
<p><strong>Part 1:</strong> The Union and its territory<br>
<strong>Part 2</strong>: Citizenship</p>
<p>ye citizen ship ke bare mein batata hai, kya rules hai kya nahi</p>
<p><strong>Part 3</strong>: Fundamental Rights ke bare mein hai.</p>
<p><strong>Part 4</strong> Directive Principles of State policy.</p>
<p>ye enforceable nahi hai, ye fundamental right nahi hai, aap court nahi ja sakte.<br>
Ye batata hai ki wo kaun si cheeje hai jo govt ko follow karni chaiye policy banate time</p>
<p><strong>Part 4-A</strong> Fundamental Duties<br>
Jaise flag wale rules</p>
<p><strong>Part 5</strong>- The union govt</p>
<p>Chapter 1: The Executive<br>
Chapter 2: Parliament<br>
Chapter 3: Legislative powers of president<br>
Chapter 4: The Union judiciary<br>
Chapter 5: CAG of India</p>
<p><strong>Part 6:</strong> the state govt</p>
<p>Chapter I- General<br>
Chapter 2: The Executive<br>
Chapter 3: The State Legislature<br>
Chapter 4: Legislative Powers of Governors<br>
Chapter 5: High courts<br>
Chapter 6: Subordinate courts</p>
<p><strong>Part 8</strong>: The union Territories</p>
<p>Delhi and Ponducherry ke paas legislative hai bas</p>
<p><strong>Part 9</strong>- The Panchayats</p>
<p><strong>Part 9-A</strong> Municipalities<br>
<strong>Part 9- B</strong> The cooperative societies</p>
<p><strong>Part 10</strong> The scheduled and tribal areas.</p>
<p><strong>Part 11</strong> – Center-State Relations</p>
<p>C1 Legislative relations<br>
C2 Administrative Relations</p>
<p><strong>Part 12</strong> Finance property contracts and suits</p>
<p>C1- Finance<br>
C2- Borrowing<br>
C3-- property contracts rights liabilities obligations and suits<br>
C4- Right to property( ye pahle fundamental right tha ab nahi hai)</p>
<p><strong>Part 13</strong>– Trade commerce</p>
<p><strong>Part 14</strong>== Services under the union and the states</p>
<p>C1-Services<br>
C2-PSC</p>
<p><strong>Part 14</strong> A Tribunals</p>
<p><strong>Part 15</strong> Elections</p>
<p><strong>Part 16</strong> Special Provisions relating to certain classes</p>
<p><strong>Part 17</strong>- official language</p>
<p>C1- Language of the union<br>
C2–Regional Language<br>
C3- Language of the Sc and HC<br>
C4-Special Directives</p>
<p><strong>Part 18</strong> Emergency Provisions</p>
<p><strong>Part 19</strong>: Miscellaneous</p>
<p><strong>Part 20</strong>-Amendment of Constitution</p>
<p><strong>Part 21-</strong>- Temporary, transitional and Special provisions</p>
<p><strong>Part 22-</strong> Short title, commencement, authoritative text in Hindi and Repeals</p>
<p>Part VII ( dealing with Part - B states) was deleted by the 7th Amendment Act (1956). On the other hand, both Part IV - A and Part XIV - A were added by the 42nd Amendment Act (1976), while Part OX-A was added by the 74th Amendment Act (1992), and Part IX-B was added by the 97th Amendment Act (2011).</p>
<p>Trick 1<br>
U Can Fly directly from US to UP to meet shayam and Ram</p>
<p>Fruit taste sweet to eat and so on</p>
<p>Eat Maggie and Tomato Sauce</p>
<p><strong>Lecture 2: Schedules of Indian Constitution</strong></p>
<p>12 hai total. All are important.</p>
<p>I-S Name of the states and their territorial jurisdiction<br>
Name of Union Territories</p>
<p>S2 Provisions relating to the emoluments, allowances, privileges and so on of: The President, Gov, Speaker and Deputy Speaker, Chairman and the Deputy chairman of RS, Speaker and Dep Speaker of state legislative, Judges of SC, HC and CAG</p>
<p>S3- Form of oaths or affirmations–</p>
<p>Union Ministers, Member of Parliament, State ministers, Judges of the HC, candidates of for election to state legislatures, the members of the state legislatures,  The candidates for election to the parliament, The judges of the Supreme Court, The CAG of India</p>
<p>S4- Allocation of seats in the RS to the states and the union territories.</p>
<p>S5-Provision relating to the administration and control of scheduled are and scheduled tribe</p>
<p>S6= Provision relating to admin. of tribal areas in the states of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram</p>
<p>S7–Union List, State List, Concurrent List</p>
<p>S8–Languages(22)<br>
Eng is not a Sch. language</p>
<p>S9-- Land Reforms and Abolition of Zamindari. SC ne kaha Post 2000 April 22 1973 koi bhi la is schedule mein add nahi hoga</p>
<p>S10–Anti-Defection law</p>
<p>S11-Panchayats</p>
<p>S12- Municipalities</p>
<p><strong>Lecture 3–Sources of Constitutions</strong></p>
<p>Government of India Act of 1935-- Federal Scheme, Office of Governer, Judiciary, Public Service Commissions</p>
<p>British Constitution- parliamentary government, Rule of law, single citizenship, cabinet system</p>
<p>US- Fundamental Rights, Independence of Judiciary, Judicial Review, Removal of HC and SC judges.</p>
<p>Irish – DPSP, Nomination of members to RS and method of election of president.</p>
<p>Canadian – Federation with strong centre, appointment of state governor by the center, residuary powers</p>
<p>Aus-- Concur list, freedom of trade, commerce and joint sitting of two houses of parliament.</p>
<p>Weimar Constitution of Germany- Suspension of Rights during germany</p>
<p>USSR/Russia- Fundamental Duties, ideals of Justice(Social Economic or political)</p>
<p>French-- Republic, and ideal of liberty, equality and fraternity in the preamble</p>
<p>South Africa- Procedure of Amendment of the consitiution and election of members of RS</p>
<p>Japan- procedure established by law</p>
<p>Lecture 4- Preamble of Constitution</p>
<p>Preamble is based on the objectives resolution</p>
<p>We the people of India, having solemnly resolved to constitute India into a <strong>SOVEREIGN SOCIALIST SECULAR DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC</strong> and to secure to all its citizens</p>
<p>Sovereign-- Independent<br>
Socialist-- India will not work on Capitalist ideology.<br>
Republic-- Head position indirectly elected by people, wo heredietry position nahi hai. Jaise Britian mein Queen king hota hai</p>
<p><strong>JUSTICE</strong>, Social, economical and political</p>
<p><strong>LIBERTY</strong> of thought expression, belief and, faith and worship</p>
<p><strong>EQUALITY</strong> of status and opportunity</p>
<p>and to promote among them all</p>
<p><strong>FRATERNITY</strong>  assuring the dignity of individuals and the unity and integrity of the Nation</p>
<p>In our constituent assembly this twenty sixth day of november, 1949 do hereby adopt enact and give to ourselves this constitution.</p>
<p>26- Nov ko constitution day manate hai. Is din adopt hua tha, and 26 January 1950 ko enforce and 100% implement hua tha.</p>
<p><strong>Lecture 5-- Constituent Assembly</strong></p>
<p>Idea was given by MN Roy in 1934, Pioneer of Communist Movement in India.</p>
<p>1946 mein form hui thi.<br>
Constituent Assembly was to be a partly elected and partly nominated body(princely states, each community)</p>
<p>Mahatma Gandhi and Jinnah not a part of Constituent Assembly</p>
<p>First meeting DEC 1946 Temporary President- DR. Sachchidanand Sinha</p>
<p>When the assembly again met(when ???)</p>
<p>President- Dr. Rajendra Prasad<br>
Vice Pre- HC Mukherjee<br>
Constitutional Advisor-- B N Rau</p>
<p>Objectives Resolution moved by Nehru and adopted in January 1947(modified preamble)</p>
<p>Functioned both as a legislative body and constituent body–Legislative body matlab Constituent Assembly acted as parliament</p>
<p>jab wo Constituent body ki tarah meet karte the to president wahi Dr. Rajendra Prasad</p>
<p>but jab wo as a law making body(legislative body meet karte the) tab president act karte the G V Mavlankar</p>
<p>Other functions performed by our constituent assembly( I mean constitution ko draft karne ke alawa)</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Ratified India’s  membership of commonwealth in 1949 (May)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Adopted National Flag in July 1947</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Adopted national anthem in Jan 1950 (before 26 Jan)</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>Adopted National Song in Jan 1950</p>
<p>Elected  Dr. Rajendra Prasad  as First president of Indian on Jan 24 1950</p>
<p>Major Committes</p>
<p>Union Powers Com.-- Nehru<br>
Union Constitutional Com- Nehru<br>
Provincial Constitution Com.-- Sardar Patel<br>
Drafting Com— B R Ambedkar<br>
Fun Rights C-- J B Kriplani<br>
Minorities C-- H C Mukherjee</p>
<p>States C- Nehru<br>
Steering C-- Dr. Rajendra Prasad</p>
<p><strong>Lecture 6- Union and its Territory</strong></p>
<p>Article 1-- India that is Bharat is a union of states</p>
<p>Federation of states and union of states ka matlab clear hona chaiye. In case bhul jao to dubara dekh lena.</p>
<p>Territory-- Territories of states, Union of territories, Territories may be acquired(koi agar baad mein aana chahe to)</p>
<p>Article 2 – Parliament can admit new states, establish new states.</p>
<p>Article 3- parliament can change name, area, boundary of a state.</p>
<p>Prior recommendation of president needed and it is referred to state legislative but president not bound by it.</p>
<p>Article 4-- Article 2 and 3 dono ka jo ek legislative process hai wo simple majority(more than 50%) se ho jayega</p>
<p>Reorganisation of States-- Dhar commission in 1947 and recommended on basis of administrative convenience</p>
<p>JVP Committee- JL Nehru, Vallabh Patel, Pattabhi Sitaramayya</p>
<p>It rejected language as basis for reorg of stes.</p>
<p>Division to first linguistic state ie. Andhra. after a 56 day hunger strike and death of Potti  Sriramulu in 1963</p>
<p>Uske baad Fazl Ali commission which accepted language as a basis of reorg</p>
<p>States Formed</p>
<p>Telugu-AP<br>
Gujarati- Gujrat<br>
Marathi-Maha<br>
HIndi- Haryana</p>
<p>On the basis of admin. convenience-- UK, Chattisgarh. and Jharkhand formed in 2000.</p>
<p><strong>Part II-- Citizenship</strong></p>
<ol start="5">
<li>Citizenship at the commencement of the Constitution.</li>
<li>Rights of citizenship of certain persons who have migrated to India from Pakistan.</li>
<li>Rights of citizenship of certain migrants to Pakistan.</li>
<li>Rights of citizenship of certain persons of Indian origin residing outside India.</li>
<li>Persons voluntarily acquiring citizenship of a foreign State not to be citizens.</li>
<li>Continuance of the rights of citizenship.</li>
<li>Parliament to regulate the right of citizenship by law.## Heading</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>Lecture 7 Fundamental Rights - Part 1</strong></p>
<p>Part III of cons mein jo rights hai unko bolte hai  fundamental rights and uske alawa jo rights hote hai unko legal rights bolte hai</p>
<p>FR ka main idea tha ki quality of life acchi rahe.</p>
<p>Justiciable in Nature --agar aapko ye right denied ho to aap court mein jaa sakte ho.</p>
<p>Magna carta of India</p>
<p>6 Fundamental Rights</p>
<ol>
<li>Rights to Equality (14-18)</li>
<li>Rights to Freedom(19-22)</li>
<li>RIght against exploitation (23-24)</li>
<li>RIght to freedom and religion</li>
<li>Cultural and Education rights</li>
<li>RIghts to constitutional remedies</li>
</ol>
<p>Right to property act under Article 31 removed and added as a legal right under article 300-A by 44th Amendment Act 1978</p>
<p>Rights to Equality<br>
A14- Equality before law and equal protection of law<br>
A15- No discrimination on basis of race, religion, caste, sex and place of birth.<br>
A16- Equal opportunities in public employment. No discrimination on basis of race, religion, caste, sex, <em>descent</em>, and place of birth or residence.<br>
A17-- Abolition of untouchability(Social Evil)<br>
A18- Abolition of Articles (except academic, and military titles)</p>
<p><strong>Lecture 8 and 9</strong></p>
<p>Cabinet mission plan ke recommendation pe constituent assembly ka set up hua</p>
<p>First meeting of Constituent assembly was held in New Delhi on 9th Dec 1946</p>
<p>Temporary chairman of constituent assembly- Dr. Sachidananda Sinha</p>
<p>Union powers committee head- JL nehru</p>
<p>Indian constitution contains three list-state, union, concurent</p>
<p>How Indian citizenhip is acquired – By birth, by registration</p>
<p>Simple majority(of parliament LS or RS??) se new state create kar sakte hai</p>
<p>June 2, 2014 Telangana</p>
<p><strong>Lecture 10: Fundamental Rights Part: 2</strong></p>
<blockquote>
<p>Written with <a href="https://stackedit.io/">StackEdit</a>.</p>
</blockquote>

